---
layout: post
author: Madeye
tags: xv6 OS
---

This post marks the starting point of my journey into the world of operating
systems by examining a particular one called [xv6](https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-public).

Xv6 is a teaching operating system developed by the people in MIT.
There are two official versions of xv6. It is first developed targeting the x86
architecture, later their effort moves to the development for the new RISC-V
architecture. And the original x86 version is no longer under development.

I chose the x86 version simply because I want to know more about the x86
architecture.

## Environment to build and run the kernel
I have a Debian 12 system set up on my old Macbook Pro which uses an Intel CPU
(Core i5-6287U, dual cores, 4 threads). To build and/or debug the kernel, a
compiler toolchain and various other tools (such as **Make, GDB**) are needed.
To run the kernel, I need [QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/docs/master/about/index.html).
QEMU is a machine emulator which can be used for system emulation and user mode
emulation. System emulation provides a virtual model of an entire machine
(CPU, memory and emulated devices) to run a guest OS. Obviously, this is what I
need. To install QEMU on Debian, just run this command: 
```shell
sudo apt install qemu-system-x86
```

Now I describe the steps to build and run the kernel.

### Get the source code
I cloned the original repo of xv6 as xv6-x86 to my local machine:

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/clone.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

## Build
Now, it's time to build the kernel. Run `make` inside the root directory of
the cloned repository:

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/build.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

You can see that there is something wrong in the source file **mp.c** that
causes gcc to report errors. Of course the permanent solution is to fix those
problems (which look like bugs based on the error descriptions), but now I
just want to make sure that the kernel is runable. So the workaround here is to
modify the flags passed to gcc. Take a look at the **Makefile**, you can see
that the option `-Werror` is passed to gcc, so gcc will make all warnings into
errors. 
```make
CFLAGS = -fno-pic -static -fno-builtin -fno-strict-aliasing -O2 -Wall -MD -ggdb -m32 -Werror -fno-omit-frame-pointer
```
Just delete the `-Werror` option then Make will run quietly:
```make
# CFLAGS = -fno-pic -static -fno-builtin -fno-strict-aliasing -O2 -Wall -MD -ggdb -m32 -Werror -fno-omit-frame-pointer
CFLAGS = -fno-pic -static -fno-builtin -fno-strict-aliasing -O2 -Wall -MD -ggdb -m32 -fno-omit-frame-pointer
```

## Run the kernel
To run the kernel inside qemu, just run the command `make qemu`:

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/qemu.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

Wonderful! Despite the problems in the source code, xv6 boots and runs inside
qemu. Now let's try some shell commands.

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/commands.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

The `ls` and `echo` commands run perfectly! How very exciting!
