---
layout: post
author: TYY
title: Program Counter in ARM Processor
tags: ARM
---

In x86 architecture, as we all know, the program counter register (actually
called the instruction pointer in x86, same thing with a different name) always
points to the next instruction to be executed during normal program flow
(i.e. without branching). Well, this is not the case for a 32-bit ARM processor.
In 32-bit ARM architecture, instead of pointing to the next intruction to be
executed, the PC always points to the next instruction to be **fetched**. This
means that the PC value of an ARM instruction is its address plus 8 due to a
legacy of the three stage pipeline of the original ARM1 processor as illustrated in
the picture below. We can see that when the first `MOV` instruction is being executed,
the third `MOV` instruction whose address is the current PC value is being fetched.

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/pipeline.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

 To see this in real code, we can examine the machine code of the `B` instruction
 which is used for branching.
The following is the disassembly of a piece of ARM assembler code containing the `B`
instruction: `b 0x10058` and its machine code `eafffffe` in hexadecimal. `0x10058`
is the address of the target instruction, i.e. the instruction that the processor
is about to jump to.
```make
0x00010058 <+4>:     eafffffe        b       0x10058 <_start+4>
0x0001005C <+8>:     ...
0x00010060 <+10>:    ...
```

In this case it simply branches to itself which effectively causes
the program to stop there forever. The picture below shows the encoding of the `B` instruction.

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/encoding.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}

Now when the processor executes a branch instruction,
it uses the current PC value to create the address of the target instruction using the following formula:

$$
address\ of\ the\ target\ instruction = PC + imm24 << 2.
$$

For our case here, the `imm24` field equals to `fffffe` which is the 2's complement of `-2`.
Shifting this number to the left by 2 bits effectively multipies it by 4 which gives us `-8`.
Then `-8` is added to the current PC value `0x00010060` to give our target instruction's address.
By the way, the `imm24 << 2` part is the offset from the current PC value to
the target instruction. This method of calculating instruction's address is called __*PC-relative addressing*__.
